Let’s discuss the theme
“Imitate Jesus in Showing
Favor to Lowly Ones.”
Now, open up to Proverbs,
please, chapter 19.
And here’s a beautiful proverb
in harmony with this theme,
Proverbs 19:17.
It says: “The one showing favor to the lowly
“is lending to Jehovah,
and He [Jehovah] will repay him
for what he does.”
Well, that’s a beautiful thought, isn’t it?
We’re going to ‘lend to Jehovah.’
The Hebrew word for “lowly”
literally means “thin,”
“lean,” or “slender.”
So it’s someone who is weak
due to maybe some depressing circumstance
—poverty or illness.
The English word “lowly” means “bent low.”
And there’s a heavy weight on their back.
They need help; they are lowly.
And if you think about it,
all of us are lowly at times, aren’t we?
There are times there’s a heavy weight
on our back, and we’re bent low.
And, of course, we know
that Jesus set the perfect example
in showing favor to lowly ones.
But now, here’s a question:
What qualities enabled him to do so?
Well, let’s discuss three.
And those same three qualities
will put us in a position
to show this favor to lowly ones
and lend to Jehovah.
Number one: compassion.
Now, compassion is defined
in the Insight book
as ‘a sympathetic awareness
of another’s suffering
coupled with a desire
to alleviate that suffering.’
So in other words,
we’re keenly aware of someone’s suffering,
and we want to do something
about it to alleviate it.
Open up to Mark chapter 6, please.
Now, here’s a beautiful example
of Jesus showing compassion.
Mark 6, and please,
let’s read verse 34.
It says: “Well, on getting out [of the boat],
“he saw a large crowd,
“and he was moved with pity for them,
“because they were as sheep
without a shepherd.
And he started to teach them many things.”
Now let’s think about the circumstances.
Jesus was very tired.
He really needed some quiet time,
some downtime.
He didn’t even have time
to eat a meal in peace.
So he gets in a boat,
he goes to an isolated area,
but a crowd of thousands of people
found out where he was going.
They got there ahead of him.
Now, when Jesus got out of the boat,
how could he have reacted?
He could have immediately
dismissed that crowd
or maybe made an appointment with them.
“Now, come back tomorrow,
this same time tomorrow,
and then I’ll help you.”
Or he could have maybe spent
10 or 15 minutes with them,
taught them a few things
—flipped them a few spiritual tidbits,
we could say
—and then sent them on their way.
But, no!
Pity and compassion
moved him to teach them many things.
And apparently several hours
were involved
because the account says
that while he was teaching them,
‘the hour grew late.’
In fact,
he even fed them physically
before he sent them on their way.
But, what was it
that moved him to do this?
Compassion.
So similarly,
compassion will move us
to extend favor to the lowly.
If we don’t have
this right feeling toward them,
we might not even notice
the suffering they’re experiencing
and we’re certainly not going
to be moved to do anything about it.
But compassion will
move us to visit them, console them,
provide transportation,
give them a gift
—whatever it takes to show favor
to these lowly ones.
But now let’s get our
second quality: humility.
Please go to Philippians chapter 2.
Philippians chapter 2,
and here’s a beautiful scripture
talking about Jesus’ humility.
Beginning in verse 5,
it says:
“Keep this mental attitude in you
“that was also in Christ Jesus,
“who, although he was existing
in God’s form,
“gave no consideration to a seizure,
“namely, that he should be
equal to God.
“No, but he emptied himself
“and took a slave’s form
and became human.
“More than that,
when he came as a man,
“he humbled himself
“and became obedient
to the point of death,
yes, death on a torture stake.”
Now, first, contemplate
the humility it took
for Jesus to empty himself
of his glorious heavenly body,
his lofty heavenly home,
his privileges, his position.
But then when he got here on the earth,
think of the humility
as he dealt with the lowly,
diseased, dying offspring of Adam.
Now, think about it.
He was the only perfect person
on the planet.
He could’ve become hypercritical,
couldn’t he?
Comparing how perfect he was
with how imperfect everybody else was.
He could’ve really put people down,
but instead,
he slaved for,
ministered to, taught, washed the feet
of these lowly offspring of Adam,
treating them, in effect,
as though they were superior to himself.
Now, to appreciate, perhaps,
a little better
this humility of Jesus
—and this really doesn’t do the job,
this illustration, but it may help—
imagine that you are confined
to a home, or institution,
for mentally handicapped individuals.
Now, you’re not mentally handicapped,
but you’re confined
to this home, this institution,
where these ones are cared for.
Now, it would be very easy to develop
a superiority attitude
toward the other residents.
But, can you imagine
slaving for them,
serving them, ministering to them,
washing their feet?
Now, that would take humility,
wouldn’t it?
And perhaps that
does illustrate a little bit
the humility of this perfect man
—uniquely perfect—
dealing with the handicapped offspring
of Adam.
Well, that same quality of humility
will move us to perform
humble, down-to-earth tasks
in behalf of these ones
that may be more disadvantaged
than we are, at least right now,
to show them this favor.
These ones that are experiencing poverty,
weakness—they’re bent low
by some depressing circumstance.
Well, let’s get one more quality:
approachability.
Now, what do you think of
when you think of approachability?
Well, the dictionary defines it this way:
“Possible to approach, accessible,
easy to talk to, or deal with, friendly.”
Open up to Mark chapter 10, please,
and here’s a scripture
that talks about
this approachability of Jesus.
He attracted people
of all different backgrounds to himself.
Mark chapter 10,
and just looking at some of these verses,
look at verse 1:
“Crowds gathered to him.”
Verse 2, the Pharisees felt free
to approach.
Look at verse 10,
the disciples approached him
and “began to question him.”
Verse 13,
people brought their “young children.”
Verse 17,
“a man ran up and fell” at Jesus.
Well, here you have,
in those five verses,
crowds, the Pharisees,
Jesus’ disciples,
parents with their little children,
just a stranger—a man.
Jesus certainly
was approachable to people.
See, it was obvious
that his accessibility
but also undoubtedly his countenance
—his friendly facial expressions—
made him appear
not too busy for people.
But they felt free to approach him.
Well, similarly,
we should do our best
to develop this godly quality.
Now, it’s true we’re limited
and we’re imperfect.
But we should do our best
to try to appear accessible,
not always too busy for others.
We should strive
to maintain warm, joyful,
friendly facial expressions,
so that we appear accessible to people.
And then, as they approach,
we can show them favor,
and we can lend to Jehovah.
Well, there we have
three qualities that will help us.
Did you get them?
We talked about compassion,
humility, and approachability.
And how are we going to benefit
if we show this favor to lowly ones?
Well, Psalm 41:1 says:
“Happy is anyone
who shows consideration to the lowly.”
So Jehovah says,
“You’re going to be happy.”
And then it goes on to say:
“Jehovah will rescue him
in the day of calamity.”
And that applies to calamities now
and the big calamity—the great tribulation.
And then, remember that scripture
we read at the beginning,
Proverbs 19:17.
When we show “favor to the lowly,”
we’re “lending to Jehovah.”
And if we do that
—we give to these lowly ones,
not expecting anything in return—
Jehovah views it as a loan made to Him.
And he’s going to repay that loan
with favor and blessings.